UNDER MILK WOOD (a play for voices)

To begin at the beginning:

It is spring, moonless night in the small town, starless and
bible-black, the cobblestreets silent and the hunched,
courters’-and-rabbits’ wood limping invisible down to the sloeblack,
slow, black, crowblack, fishingboat-bobbing sea.

The houses are blind as moles (though moles see fine tonight in the
snouting, velvet dingles) or blind as Captain Cat there in the muffled
middle by the pump and the town clock, the shops in mourning, the
Welfare Hall in widows’ weeds. And all the people of the lulled and
dumbfound town are sleeping now.

Hush, the babies are sleeping, the farmers, the fishers, the tradesmen
and pensioners, cobbler, schoolteacher, postman and publican, the
undertaker and the fancy woman, drunkard, dressmaker, preacher,
policeman, the webfoot cocklewomen and the tidy wives. Young girls lie
bedded soft or glide in their dreams, with rings and trousseaux,
bridesmaided by glow-worms down the aisles of the organplaying wood.
The boys are dreaming wicked or of the bucking ranches of the night and
the jollyrodgered sea. And the anthracite statues of the horses sleep
in the fields, and the cows in the byres, and the dogs in the wetnosed
yards; and the cats nap in the slant corners or lope sly, streaking and
needling, on the one cloud of the roofs.


You can hear the dew falling, and the hushed town breathing. Only your
eyes are unclosed, to see the black and folded town fast, and slow,
asleep. And you alone can hear the invisible starfall, the
darkest-before-dawn minutely dewgrazed stir of the black, dab-filled
sea where the Arethusa, the Curlew and the Skylark, Zanzibar, Rhiannon,
the Rover, the Cormorant, and the Star of Wales tilt and ride.


Listen.

It is night moving in the streets, the processional salt slow musical
wind in Coronation Street and Cockle Row, it is the grass growing on
Llareggub Hill, dew fall, star fall, the sleep of birds in Milk Wood.

Listen.

It is night in the chill, squat chapel, hymning, in bonnet and brooch
and bombazine black, butterfly choker and bootlace bow, coughing like
nannygoats, sucking mintoes, fortywinking hallelujah; night in the
four-ale, quiet as a domino; in Ocky Milkman’s loft like a mouse with
gloves; in Dai Bread’s bakery flying like black flour. It is tonight in
Donkey Street, trotting silent, with seaweed on its hooves, along the
cockled cobbles, past curtained fernpot, text and trinket, harmonium,
holy dresser, watercolours done by hand, china dog and rosy tin
teacaddy. It is night neddying among the snuggeries of babies.



Look.

It is night, dumbly, royally winding through the Coronation cherry
trees; going through the graveyard of Bethesda with winds gloved and
folded, and dew doffed; tumbling by the Sailors Arms.

Time passes. Listen. Time passes.

Come closer now.

Only you can hear the houses sleeping in the streets in the slow deep
salt and silent black, bandaged night. Only you can see, in the blinded
bedrooms, the coms and petticoats over the chairs, the jugs and basins,
the glasses of teeth, Thou Shalt Not on the wall, and the yellowing
dickybird-watching pictures of the dead. Only you can hear and see,
behind the eyes of the sleepers, the movements and countries and mazes
and colours and dismays and rainbows and tunes and wishes and flight
and fall and despairs and big seas of their dreams.


From where you are, you can hear their dreams…

http://www.undermilkwood.net/prose_umw1.html
